"Create a list of the architectural decisions you discarded with a brief note
explaining why you ultimately rejected each decision. Recording the decisions
you discarded, the paths not taken, provides context and rationale for a design
decision.

Benefits
• Help downstream designers replay the thought process that went into the
current design.
• Head off did you consider...? discussions with stakeholders.
• Provide an additional layer of rationale for design decisions.

Description
List design decisions you considered but rejected along with the reason for
why the decision was not selected. The list can be stored in plain text or
other easily accessible format.

Guidelines and Hints
• Focus on a single view or design decision. The list should not attempt to
encompass all design decisions.
• Keep it brief. Include only enough detail so that stakeholders can under
stand the decision and why it was rejected.
• Combine with other methods to create a more complete description of the
architecture. You can list the paths not taken alongside Architecture
Decision Records on page 260 and architecture haikus on page 263.

Example
Here is an example of paths not taken for a hybrid cloud project in which an
on-premise, shrink-wrapped software system was required to integrate with
a rapidly evolving cloud platform on a continuous delivery schedule. The
shrink-wrapped software was released quarterly. The scope of the decision
centered on the integration between the two platforms.

Path Not Taken
Why the Path Was Rejected

Create a cloud-based
“services adapter”
to buffer against
changes in third
party services
---------------------------------------------
Heavy maintenance costs, benefits in features and
quality attributes not required for MVP release, costs
outweigh benefits

Release adapter as
open source, have
customers load it
themselves
--------------------------------------------------
Extra steps to deployment inhibits adoption, concern
that unmodified defaults could introduces security
risks, concerns about training customers and con
sultants, does not reduce maintenance costs

Offer a client-side library
-------------------------------------------
The client library will likely always be out of date
(services ship continuously, shrink-wrap software
ships once per quarter). Customers must learn both
cloud services and how to use the client library.
Documentation costs are highest. There is high risk
the software will not be ready by the deadline.

No new support for
web services integra
tion in the client
software
-----------------------------------------------------
Does not improve the user experience, customers
require guidance with emerging patterns and
paradigms



The final decision was to release sample code for high-priority use cases in
the documentation. The team was not responsible for maintaining the sample
code. Customers were on their own if they chose to use or extend the sample
code. Stakeholders felt this struck the right balance between costs and value.
This minimally viable release allowed the product manager to collect data on
the usefulness of the integration before investing further into the architecture."(Keeling, 274-275)

REFERENCE: Keeling, Michael. Design It! From Programmer to Software Architect. The Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2017.
