"Dynamic structures are difficult to appreciate on paper. Use a sequence dia
gram to show how control or data moves through the system at runtime.
Model the flow of logic, data, or control among components.

Benefits
• Simple and flexible notation
• Both graphical and text notations exist
• Useful for communication and reasoning
• Ample tool support, though tools are not required

Description
1. Choose a scenario to diagram. Use this as the title of the diagram.
2. List components involved in the scenario horizontally across the top of
the page. These are the participants in the diagram. Draw a straight, ver
tical life line under each participant. Participants are usually listed from
left to right starting with the participant that initiates the scenario.
3. Draw arrows from one participant’s life line to another to indicate commu
nication between those components. Label the line to describe the message.
4. Time goes down the y-axis in the diagram. Since the next message happens
after the first, it should be further down the y-axis.

[sequence diagram]

Guidelines and Hints
• Reason about distributed systems, microservices, object communication,
and other dynamic structures.
• Informal notations are fine as long as you are consistent.
• A closed arrow with a solid line indicates a synchronous request message.
• An open arrow with a solid line indicates an asynchronous request message.
• An arrow with a dotted line indicates a response message.
• Use a tool that renders text-based notations so you can store the diagrams
with your code.

Example
Here is a sequence diagram for a set of microservices responsible for saving
an item to a shopping cart, generated using js-sequence-diagrams.

[sequence diagram]

This is the text notation used to generate the diagram:

Title: Save an Item to a Shopping Cart
Front End Gatekeeper-> Sessions: Verify Session
Sessions--> Front End Gatekeeper: Session ID
Front End Gatekeeper-> Shopping Cart REST:
POST /sessions/{session_id}/items/{item_id}
Shopping Cart REST-> Shopping Cart Store:
SaveItem(session_id,\n item_id)
Shopping Cart Store-> Database: Add Item
Database--> Shopping Cart Store: Added!
Shopping Cart Store--> Shopping Cart REST: OK, echo cart
Shopping Cart REST--> Front End Gatekeeper: OK, cart as JSON


With the sequence diagram drawn, it’s easy to see a potential flaw in the
design. The first step of verifying the session creates an opportunity to validate
a session that could be closed—for example, if the user checks out before the
item is added. This API call by the Gatekeeper is redundant at best. More
likely the diagram has exposed an inappropriate assumption about the state
of the user’s session when saving an item in the Shopping Cart Store service." (Keeling, 278-280)

REFERENCE: Keeling, Michael. Design It! From Programmer to Software Architect. The Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2017.



https://github.com/bramp/js-sequence-diagrams

